---
slug: /pages/v-policies-for-schools-abroad/other-program-policies/religious-holidays
title: D.6. Religious Holidays
date: 2021-12-17
---

Middlebury College recognizes that the student body includes adherents of many faiths and that observance of religious holidays is an important part of religious practice for many students.  The Middlebury Schools Abroad also recognize that students may wish to observe some of these holidays while they are abroad.  To this end, we have adapted the [Middlebury College Religious Holidays policy](http://www.middlebury.edu/student-life/community-living/diversity-inclusivity/scott-center/religiousholidays) to apply to the Schools Abroad as well, while still operating within the confines of the host cultures and universities in which we work.

Students attending a **local host university** will be subject to that university's calendar and policies regarding religious observance.  Middlebury does not have jurisdiction over these calendars or policies.

Middlebury College recognizes the following holidays as major holidays, which warrant application of the [Middlebury Religious Holidays policy](http://www.middlebury.edu/student-life/community-living/diversity-inclusivity/scott-center/religiousholidays): Rosh Hashanah, Yom Kippur, and the first day of Passover; Good Friday and Easter Sunday; Eid al-Fitr and Eid al-Adha.  Students studying at a **Middlebury academic center** may expect that the Middlebury College Religious Holidays policy will also apply to the observance of these holidays with regards to center coursework.  Students whose conscientious religious observance requires their absence on days other than or in addition to those named above are expected to make use of the following procedure prior to the holiday: The student should submit written notification of the pending religious holiday to their School Abroad Director/Principal at least one week before the holiday.  The Director/Principal will then review the student's request related to that particular holiday.  Upon approval of the request, the Director/Principal will assist the student in requesting and/or establishing alternative arrangements for class attendance, papers, and/or exams at the Middlebury academic center.