---
slug: /pages/vi-policies-for-middlebury-institute-online/a-general-policies/a-2-scope
title: A.2. Scope
date: 2024-08-23
---
The scope of the Middlebury Institute Online handbook addresses only programs and courses offered by Middlebury Institute Online. Middlebury Institute Online defines its educational program  as structured learning opportunities in which most or all of the instruction occurs while the students and instructor are not in the same physical location. Modes of delivery can vary and may be synchronous or asynchronous. For the purposes of this handbook, “students” are defined as those individuals who have applied for admission to Middlebury Institute Online, were admitted, AND are or have been enrolled in an educational program. 

In addition to being bound by these requirements, students, staff, and faculty in all Middlebury programs are subject to the [Middlebury-Wide policies](https://www.middlebury.edu/handbook/pages/i-policies-for-all/) in the Middlebury Handbook. [Middlebury Global Operations](https://www.middlebury.edu/global-operations) policies govern international travel and international business operations.The Middlebury Institute Online Policy Handbook was developed in consultation with key stakeholders and adopted by Middlebury’s Provost. The Provost or the Provost’s designee is responsible for ensuring that this handbook and associated academic programs comply with the requirements established by the State Authorization Reciprocity Agreements (SARA) that allow Middlebury to enroll students outside the state of Vermont, the Council of Regional Accrediting Commission’s Guidelines for Distance Education, the New England Commission of Higher Education (NECHE), the State of Vermont, California’s Bureau of Private Postsecondary Education (BBPE,if applicable), the U.S. Department of Education, and any other entities that govern online education. 

For questions about how these policies interact with other Middlebury policies, please consult with the Provost or their designee, or the General Counsel. To suggest revisions to this section of the Handbook, please contact the Provost’s Office. Major academic changes to this section of the handbook will ordinarily be made at the discretion of the Provost or the Provost’s designee after meaningful consultation with relevant stakeholder groups.
