---
slug: /pages/iv-policies-for-the-institute/a-academic-policies/a-8-leaves-of-absence-withdrawal-suspension-expulsion-and-graduation/a-8-a-leave-of-absence-student-initiated
title: A.8.a. Leave of Absence - Student Initiated
date: 2021-05-01
---
A student who is in good academic standing, has successfully completed at least one semester at the Middlebury Institute, and who has met all financial obligations, may declare a leave of absence for up to two years. A leave of absence is approved for one year at a time, and the student must request an extension to continue the leave into a second year.

In order to register for a leave of absence, the student must submit a [Leave of Absence Petition](https://www.middlebury.edu/institute/sites/www.middlebury.edu.institute/files/2019-09/leave_of_absence_petition--eFillable.pdf?fv=TsilFBL8) and a non-refundable deposit of $150 must be paid by 4 P.M. on the third day of the first term of absence (Fall or Spring; Summer term is excepted). The deposit is applicable toward the student’s tuition upon returning to the Institute. Unless this procedure is followed, a returning student must apply for readmission through the Admissions Office and pay another application fee.  **International students** may be required to leave the U.S. during a leave of absence if they have not officially transferred to another academic institution or applied for a change of status through the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).

**Students should be aware that since they are not enrolled during a leave of absence, this might cause student loan payments to become due.** Students receiving any federal financial aid and/or a Middlebury Institute scholarship should obtain advice and instructions on leaves of absence from the Office of Student Financial Services.  Students with federal student loan debt will have to complete online federal student loan exit counseling. 

In the event that a student is going on a leave of absence in order to pursue a degree program-related internship, fellowship, or Peace Corps service, the settlement of tuition overloads before departure may be waived by completing the required Leave of Absence Petition. However, if a student fails to return and re-enroll, they are liable for those charges at the prevailing rate. **Note:** Students going on a leave of absence for any other reason are required to pay their overload credits before leaving the Institute. See: Course Load and Overload section A.7.d.

Upon return from a leave of absence, the student must have no outstanding balance due and have a $150 non-refundable deposit on account. The $150 tuition deposit will be applied against billed tuition in the returning semester. The deposit is good for a maximum of two years, after which the student must re-apply for admission to the Institute. **Note:** No student will be allowed to register if there is a balance due on his or her tuition account.
