---
slug: /pages/v-policies-for-schools-abroad/academic-policies/schools-abroad-b-4-master-of-arts-degree-candidacy
title: B.4. Master of Arts Degree Candidacy (graduate students only)
date: 2023-02-09
---

The Master of Arts degree in French, German, Italian, Russian, or Spanish requires twelve units in the areas of language, literature, and civilization, or the specific academic focus of the Applied MA track. Receipt of the Bachelor of Arts degree or the equivalent from a regionally accredited institution is a prerequisite for admission to the Master of Arts program. Students are notified by letter of their formal acceptance into the Master of Arts program after successfully completing three graduate-level courses during their first summer of study on the Middlebury or Bennington campus.  If a student earns a grade lower than B- in any course during the summer of candidacy, the student will be notified in writing that admission to the Master of Arts degree program has been denied.  Students who are denied admission to the Master of Arts degree program may submit a letter requesting reconsideration of candidacy if special circumstances exist that contributed to the negative outcome of the summer of candidacy.  Written requests will be reviewed by the director whose decision, in consultation with faculty and the Dean’s office (if necessary), is final.  Any student who is granted permission for readmission to the summer of candidacy must successfully complete all courses required for the degree. They may then complete the Master of Arts at a Middlebury School Abroad or by attending subsequent summer sessions in Vermont.

A highly-qualified undergraduate student may accumulate, before receipt of the B.A. degree or equivalent, a maximum of three graduate units at the Language Schools to be applied toward the Master of Arts degree. Such units may not count toward both degrees.

Master of Arts degree students who are assigned a final grade of “F” in any course will be dismissed from the program.  All other failing grades represent unsatisfactory progress and may jeopardize a student’s eligibility for federal loans, and may be grounds for dismissal from the program. Transfer courses may not be used to make up for failures. All failed courses must be made up during a summer session in Vermont or at a School Abroad.  In addition, the original, failing grade will remain on the student’s Middlebury transcript.  A Master of Arts candidate who withdraws from a School Abroad may complete the degree only through further study on the Vermont campus.  Special permission must be granted to complete the degree at a School Abroad.