---
slug: /pages/v-policies-for-schools-abroad/academic-policies/schools-abroad-b-1-academic-honesty
title: B.1. Academic Honesty/Honor Code
date: 2023-02-09
---
Middlebury requires complete intellectual honesty of every student in the preparation of all assigned academic work. Work submitted must be your own. For written work you may consult friends or native speakers about few grammatical problems, but your work may not in any way be corrected or rewritten by others. Exceptions to this rule must be made explicitly by the instructor and/or Director/Principal and must apply to all students. You are strongly encouraged to ascertain the format in which faculty expect quotations from secondary sources.

Unless explicitly allowed by the faculty member, the use of translation or AI software for any further benefit than that derived from a dictionary (i.e. definition, spelling, or pronunciation) for individual words (not phrases, nor whole sentences) is a violation of the academic honesty code. Violations of the [honor code](/pages/ii-ug-college-policies/ug-policies/academics/acad-honesty/) may result in disciplinary action up to and including expulsion from the Middlebury Schools Abroad program.

If the Director, or in the case of Oxford, the Senior Tutor or Assistant Senior Tutor, suspects a student of plagiarism, cheating, or duplicate use of written work, the Director/Senior Tutor/Assistant Senior Tutor will gather the evidence, including offering to meet with the student, and determine with the instructor whether or not a case should proceed. If it is decided that there is a case, the evidence will be forwarded to the appropriate administrator/faculty on the Vermont campus. That person will then make a determination as to whether the policy was violated and assign a sanction.

Graduate students should be aware that if the sanction results in an F on the assignment, and that F lowers the final course grade to below a B- (MA students) or B+ (DML students), [no course with these grades may be applied toward the degree](http://schoolsabroadhandbooks.middcreate.net/graduate/academics/grades-transcripts-and-transfer-of-credit/). Students are further reminded that any student who is assigned a final grade of F for a course will be dismissed from the program.